>> Daniel Steffen: Good morning.
Welcome to the Simplifying iPhone App
Development with Grand Central Dispatch.
Thanks for being here on a Friday morning after
the beer bash for learning more about GCD.
My name is Daniel Steffen, I'm an engineer
on the GCD team, and this morning we'll learn
about a quick technology overview to start
with, then go through a few examples of how
to simply your existing multithreaded code by using GCD.
Then my coengineer will come up to talk about
some design patterns that we encourage you to use
when you program your GCD, and finally going to some
of our GCD objects in depth and look at their APIs.
So we've introduced GCD and blocks last
year at WWDC for Mac OS X Snow Leopard.
And this year, we're very pleased to
bring it to you in iOS 4 for the iPhone.
As you can see here, Grand Central Dispatch
lives very low down in our technology stack.
This allows it to make very efficient use of
kernel resources, kernel primitives when necessary,
and also all the higher up levels on the stock to use it,
and indeed many of our system fragments
already do and now so can your application.
So as you saw in that picture, GCD is part
of libSystem, that means that it comes along
with very basic system functionality like malloc and you
don't have to provide any special linker setup to get it.
It's available to all apps and all you do is
include the dispatch header to get started.
Note that the GCD API has both a block-based
variant and the function-based variant.
Today, we're only going to be talking
about the block-based variant.
We feel that that's the most convenient for new
code or even for existing check your C-based code
if you have C-based function based
code that you've already affected.
You may be interested in the function-based
variant of the API
and we've encouraged you to look
at the documentation for that.
So let's do a quick recap of our
first session this week, on Wednesday.
If you were unable to attend that, the-- you'd be glad
to hear that we'll be repeating a session this afternoon
at 2 o'clock so you may want to come to that, and in that
session we looked at blocks and an introduction to blocks
and why they are good to and very convenient to encapsulate
units effect that you want to do maybe on a different thread
or maybe asynchronously or just as iterations, and we
looked at how to use dispatch_async to get these blocks
to run somewhere else, and then when they're done,
get the results back to the main
thread, with another dispatch_async.
And the location where these blocks run are
called queues, GCD queues, dispatch queues.
And we looked at the details on those, they're really
just a lightweight list of blocks that you have committed
for execution, and the enqueue and
dequeue operations on those FIFO.
Then we looked at two types of queues, one is the main
queue which you get with the dispatch_get_main_queue API
and that's tied to the main thread,
the main run loop and you can use it
to execute blocks that update the UI for instance.
And we looked at queues that you can grant yourself called
serial queues as well which execute blocks one by one
but on an automatic helper thread in the background.
So a quick animation to remind you what async looks like.
We have the main queue here tied to the main thread,
and one of these dispatch queues that we've created.
The main thread creates a block for some unit
of work that it wants to do somewhere else,
and that block can capture a state
as well-- data, as well as the code.
And now this does the dispatch_async which enqueues that
block onto the dispatch queue, then the system notices
that there's some work available creates an
automatic thread for you and runs the block.
When done, the automatic thread goes away
again and this is returned to steady state.
So let's look at how you can simplify
your existing multithreaded code, GCD.
Why would you want to do this?
You have your code already, it works but maybe the
threading that you have to do the code and you have to write
to implement the threading was very complicated.
GCD brings advantages to this that may make you want
to adopt it even for a code that you already have.
In particular, it's very, very efficient.
This leaves more CPU cycles for your code and
fewer CPU cycles are used to maintain threading
to synchronization or interthread communication.
Also, GCD provides much better
metaphors for multithreaded programming.
As we've seen in our first session, blocks are very,
very easy to use when doing multithreaded programming
and allow you to express what you want to do
somewhere else in line directly at that point
where you think, now I want to do something.
You do not have to push it somewhere
else in your source files.
And queues-- and the queue primitive in GCD is in
turn-- inherently friendly to producer-consumer schemes,
meaning that you don't have to implement your own
facilities to keep track of work that needs to be done
on a background thread and have to
communicate results back and forth.
And GCD provides a system-wide perspective on thread
usage in your app, and this is really something
that only an OS facility can do for you if you have
threads in your application that you can manage yourself.
You cannot really share those threads with
a framework that may also be using threads
or with some third party library that
you use that may be using its own threads,
and you cannot balance those subsystems on
either-- an OS facility can really do that for you.
GCD is also very compatible with your existing
code so you don't have to adopt it all at once.
It might make sense to just start using it in new code
that you add to the app and the existing threading
and synchronization primitives that we are
using currently will be 100 percent compatible.
And in fact, GCD threads are just wrapped POSIX threads.
This means also that because the system creates those
threads for you, you should not modify them in ways
that will change them irreversibly, in particular
don't cancel, exit, kill them, etcetera.
You didn't create those threads, don't destroy them.
And because GCD reuses threads, you may be-- may
have to be careful about modifying any thread states,
like for instance the current working
directory in one of your blocks.
If you do that, make sure that you return it to the
state you found it in because the thread will be reused
and will execute another block, maybe from a different
queue, maybe from a system queue that you don't even know
about and the block that comes after you will then find
this-- otherwise find a state that it doesn't understand.
So let's talk about threads in some more detail.
Why use threads on the iPhone?
There's only one core.
Well, as we've gone over in some
detail in our first session,
the main reason is to increase app
responsiveness to get work off the main thread.
The main thread should really only be handling
UIEvents and updating the user interface.
It shouldn't be doing anything else and you probably are
doing this currently and managing your threads yourself
by using NSThread or even pthread_create directly.
And as you know, this has nonmaterial costs, both in
manpower needed to write that code, maintain that code,
design your threading scheme, as well as in CPU and memory
costs maybe to bring out the thread frequently on demand
or otherwise have long running threads hanging
around for the lifetime of the application.
So let's look-- have a look at some code that you
might be using currently to create on-demand threads.
Imagine we have an Objective-C method that
needs to do a time consuming operation
and wants to spin up an on-demand thread for that.
So you would have to-- using NSThread API, you would have
to initialize that thread with the special purpose selector
that runs that thread's code and run the thread,
auto release it, and implement that method,
and then you set up the thread and
finally do the long running operation.
How could we improve on that by using GCD?
Very similar, but we have a lot less boilerplate.
We create a dispatch queue with the dispatch_queue_create
API passing in the label that allows you
to identify your queue in Xcode or in the crash
reporter and then with just dispatch_async,
a block that does a long running operation to this queue.
And that is all that is needed.
You can release the queue if you don't need it anymore
at this point and GCD will do all the thread management
for you, do all the resource management
for this queue for you.
So what are the advantages?
Firstly, it is more convenient.
You can use blocks, you can remove a lot of your boilerplate
and you don't have to do any explicit thread management.
You don't have to decide when to create
these threads and whether it's a good idea
to have many threads or just one, GCD will do that for you.
And it is more efficient, because GCD
recycles threads, if you use it throughout,
you will end up with fewer threads overall than if you
manage them all yourself just because we have a better view
of the thread usage throughout your application.
And if you submit too many blocks to your queues, we will
actually defer some of them based on the availability
of the system and make things more efficient that way.
The next topic to look at is locking.
Obviously when you're doing multithreaded
programming, you need to worry about locking usually
to enforce some mutually exclusive access to
critical sections of code or to serialize access,
serialize access to some shared state between
threads or just in general to ensure data integrity
when you have some complex piece of state
that needs to always have a consistent--
in a consistent state and that can
be modified from multiple threads.
So, let's look at how you might be
doing that currently with NSLock API.
Here, as an example you have an Objective-C
method that maintains an imageCache object
that can be modified from multiple threads.
So you need to have some serialization mechanism
to ensure that our shared object is updated safely
so we would be maintaining, you know,
this lock object is part of our state
and lock it before we enter the critical section that then
modifies that shared object and unlock when we are done.
One thing to note here is that if you have any early exit
conditions or error conditions that you have to not forget
to unlock, it is an easy source
of bugs when you use locking APIs.
How can we make this better and easier to use with GCD?
Very similarly, we will maintain a
dispatch queue, one of the dispatch queues
that you create yourself with dispatch_queue_create.
That's part of our state, and now use
the dispatch_sync API to execute a block
that wraps the whole critical section on that queue.
Now, this is a slight change in perspective
but it really has the same effect.
These queues will only ever run one of these critical
section blocks at any time, so once you're inside the block,
you know that you're the only one executing on this queue
so the only critical section block
that is executing at this time.
So, it's just as if you had locked--
runs this critical section.
And note that we don't have to be anything special to--
in the early exit case, there is no unlocking returning
from this block is unlocking in this pattern,
so this removes that whole source of issues.
Right, you can do things that you cannot do with
the NSLock or other locking APIs with queues.
You can implement and defer to critical section
and here you will just use dispatch_async
and async that critical section block.
And for this, this would make a whole lot of sense.
Probably the color of the updateImageCache method
doesn't care that the cache is updated right away,
as long as it's updated at some point safely, right?
So, the color doesn't need to wait for the
synchronized critical section block to actually execute
so they can use dispatch_async
to do this in a different way.
And again, once we're inside we know that we're
the only ones with those critical section blocks
that is executing now so we can
safely modify the shared object.
So the advantage of using GCD instead of
locks and GCD queues is that it is safe.
You cannot forget to unlock, right,
and it is more expressive.
It allows you to say things like the
deferrable critical section example that we saw.
And again, it is more efficient.
In fact, using queues instead of locks
is much more efficient in general.
If there's no contention, you can use this
implement's wait-free synchronization.
You can think of queues as an on-demand locking mechanism.
Only if there's contention, we would actually create the
expensive lock and the associated interthread communication.
And if there is, if it detects that nobody else is currently
in the critical section, it will be very, very cheap.
Next stop is interthread communication.
If you have multiple threads, you have to be able to
communicate among them to send messages or to maybe wake
up the background thread that may be waiting to do some
work or to transfer data or data ownership at least
between these threads, and the general mechanism that you
use information for this will be the performSelector family
of methods, and here we have four
that have a relationship to threading.
PerformSelectorOnMainThread, we've looked
at that in some detail in the first session,
so we'll skip that one and look at the other three.
So how would you do performSelector:onThread with GCD?
So this runs specified selector on one
of your manually managed NSThreads.
And with GCD, instead, we will just use a
queue, and in the waitUntilDone note case,
where you don't have to wait until the selector is executed.
Just use a dispatch_async.
And inside the block, you can do everything that the
selector that you were performing before could have done,
and indeed, you don't need to implement
that selector now, right.
You can do it inline at the point where
you had to perform selector before.
If you have to waitUntilDone, you
just use dispatch_sync in the cycling.
For a performSelector afterDelay, which executes
a specified selector after some amount of time,
we provide an API called the dispatch_after.
This is exactly like dispatch_async, except that
the enqueueing happens after user specified delay.
I won't go into the detail on how to get the delay.
It's a pretty simple API that you
can look up in the documentation.
But here, this will just run this block
after 50 microseconds in this example.
And again, because it's a block, you don't
have to implement the special selector.
You can just do what you want to
do in the delayed fashion inline.
Perform selector in background is the foundation
facility that does create an on-demand thread for you.
And in this case, you don't really care when and in
relationships to what other things you select the runs.
So here, we don't force you to
create one of these dispatch queues.
You can get one of our global queues that we provide, and
we'll talk about this more in a second, and just again,
do a dispatch_async to this global queue.
So using GCD for interthread communication
is more flexible, mainly because of blocks.
They can call any selector and multiple selectors,
and there is no need to marshal and unmarshal,
pack and unpack arguments, as we
have seen in our first session.
You can call any form of selector that can
take any number of arguments and don't have
to do the usual dance that you have to in perform selector.
And it is also more efficient again, because, well,
firstly, the block capturing arguments is more efficient
in you marshaling and unmarshaling them, and we
wake up helper threads, help create them on demand.
So you don't have to figure out how to do
efficient on-demand thread management yourself.
So let's talk about these global
queues that we just saw in more detail.
Global queues also, like the queues that you create
yourself, have enqueue and dequeue operations that are FIFO.
The big difference is that they may
execute the blocks on them concurrently.
This means that the completion order of
the blocks on these queues may not be FIFO.
And you get them at this dispatch_get_global_queue
API, passing in a priority argument.
So let's see a quick animation of what this would look like.
This thread here will enqueue some
blocks onto the global dispatch queue.
So as you can see, they get enqueued in order.
And now, the system notices there is some work
to be done, so it creates automatic threads two
in this case, and it will start running these blocks.
And now, that A has completed, and now
C will complete first, and B second.
So this is the out of order part
for the completion, alright.
And when the work is done, the automatic threads
go away again, and you return to a steady state.
So global queues are actually where GCD
activity of all types is mapped to real threads.
So we allow you to control the priority of these
threads with three bands, and this is the flag that we--
the argument that you would passing
into the API that we just saw.
So we provide high default in the low priority band.
And you can use these same bands to control the
priority of the queues that you create yourself,
the threads that run the blocks on those queues, and
you will see you how to do that later on in the session.
OK. So I would like to hand it over to Shiva
now for a section on GCD design patterns.
>> Shiva Bhattacharjee: Thanks Daniel.
Wow, we have a full house.
Either you're very serious programmers
or you're not drinking hard enough.
[ Laughter ]
So Daniel showed how you can take your existing code.
He went through snippets of code where you
can take this code and use GCD to simplify it.
And in this session, we are going to kind of move
back and see some of the ways you can use GCD
to your application to simplify the overall design patterns.
We kind of mentioned this in the previous session.
GCD is this new way or new paradigm of thinking which
would help you to move from your application logic
into our implementation, much, much, much simpler.
So, one of the patterns that was-- kind of came out of
the last session was to assign a queue to each task.
The idea here is you take your application
and you break it down into different tasks,
and then you can work on those tasks
individually and they will complete as data
as available to them or in different priority orders.
Well, when tasks are executing simultaneously, you need
ways to communicate between those tasks and you saw
that you can do this easily by calling dispatch_async,
you-- you dispatch_async from one task to another task
and just passing the queue to which you want to communicate.
And most of the time, you will be passing data.
So you can imagine, you have a network
application, this is reading in data from a socket
and then it wants to do the parsing on another task.
So, one task could be responsible for actually doing
the read syscall, and then once you have the bytes,
you want to send it off to another task to do the parsing.
And with blocks, you can easily
encapsulate that and move it over.
So GCD helps you that.
So, one of the things you might
wonder, well, is queues lightweight.
I mean if I-- if my application
is broken down into many queues,
is this actually going to main issue for performance.
And it's not.
As you have seen, we do automatic thread recycling.
So if you actually have a lot of queues,
it doesn't necessarily mean we are
committing that many threads at that point.
So as work become available, we will create
these threads on demand, so it is very efficient.
So we encouraged that you try to
think your applications in this terms.
It will just help you with overall GCD APIs.
The other pattern we want to encourage
is to use low level notifications.
So this is something that you're
probably already familiar with.
The idea here is, just as in UI,
you're touching on a button.
You're doing something under control, and
then you're responding to those events.
So similarly, you want GCD to help you monitor
events and then respond on them on demand.
So in this case again, if you take the example of a
network app, you don't want to go ahead in your block
and do the blocking read syscall or the
receive syscall because that's just going
to block the thread and wait for data to arrive.
Ideally, you want some facility that will say, hey, data is
available for you and you go ahead and then read the data.
Similarly, if you're interested in knowing if
files are being deleted or added to a directory,
you don't want to pull that directory all the time.
You want to-- get passes to notifications
effectively saying, hey,
data files have been added, so at
that point you want to respond.
So, we export dispatch sources.
These are exactly what you would expect them to do.
They monitor these sources.
You register event handlers for them and when
the event fires, you can do your handling.
So this makes your apps even more responsive.
Nowhere in your code-- now you have threads
just are blocked waiting for things to happen,
but rather the system tells you
when things happen and you dispatch.
Once you have-- once you know that there
is work, you dispatch to handle that block.
So let's get in more details with dispatch sources.
We provide a single API and with the single API, you
can actually monitor a variety of low level sources.
Now, you might be wondering if you're familiar with our
platform, we have run loop sources that you can register
with the main thread or with any other thread.
And the nice thing with dispatch sources
is the event handler can run on any queue.
And while the handler is running on this other
queue, you are still monitoring the source.
So generally, with the run loop source what happens
is you register a run loop source with a thread
and since the main thread is readily available to you,
we see most app developers just
registering it with the main thread.
Now when the even fires, your thread, your main
thread is busy handling that event handle block
and therefore it's not actually monitoring the sources
or any other sources that you have registered with it.
So to get efficiency, you either spun off another thread
to actually do the work and make the main thread go back
to listening, so we are back to kind of square one where
you are having to do with thread management explicitly.
But even in that first case if you want to improve
the performance, you also have to be careful
that while I'm doing the event handling,
that same event might fire again.
So, you have to be careful about dispatching
two of those event handlers at the same time
that are running on two different threads.
So GCD provides-- even though GCD monitors these events
while threads are-- while you are handling the event,
we would not actually invoke your
event handler while you're doing it.
So we will wait for it and in a sense it is reentrant
safe, so you can do critical actions if you want
in your event handler knowing that that's the only
event handler for that event that is going to happen.
Also, you can suspend dispatch sources.
You are no longer interested in monitoring
or handling the event for the time being.
You are doing other work, so you can
suspend the sources and resume them at will,
and GCD will monitor this event while you're doing that.
So, let's look at an example of
how we would create a read source.
So, first you have socket.
You set the socket to nonblocking, and the idea here--
we will come back to why do we set it to nonblocking.
And then you set-- you create a
source with dispatch_source_create.
You pass in the type of the source you're interested,
in this case, the read type and the socket.
So, this is the file descriptor that is backing
the read source, and you're passing a target queue.
This is the queue on which your event handler
blocks will be enqueued when the event fires.
Then you set the event handler block with
the dispatch_source_set_event_handler call,
and this is where you would actually do the read syscall.
Now, this is where why we set the file descriptor to be
nonblocking because we don't want to wait on the read call.
So there could be cases where in a read my return
you have no data and you want to just retry it.
So the subtle thing here is if read returns
you error or EAGAIN for any other reason,
you do not yourself have to a do while loop on that.
The event source is the one that's actually
going to drive that event handler for you,
so it makes your event handling
even much more simpler that way.
And dispatch sources are created in a suspended state,
and partly we have this created in a suspended state
so that you can set all these event handler on-- in
other configurations that we'll see later down the road.
Well, once you have set all these things, you
resume the source and at this point your event--
your dispatch source is starting
to monitor that file descriptor.
So, let's look visually at what happens.
You have the main thread which is tied to the main queue.
You create a read source and set the target
queue to a dispatch queue that you have created.
Well, data come along.
That causes the read source to fire and then the
event handler gets enqueued on the dispatch queue.
The automatic thread comes along because it sees there
is work to be done on this queue, reads off the data,
clears the condition and the read
source is available to fire again.
Now, you might be-- you might want to update
your UI with the data that you have received.
So, you async a block on to the main queue
and you can do that with the dispatch_async.
So it's kind of like a nested dispatch_async
we took from within your blocks.
So the read source that they set went back
and is able to call, is able to fire again.
The automated thread goes away because it has
finished the work and the UI gets finally updated.
So we have mentioned this in passing.
So, you can suspend a source and/or the event handling
could be happening when the source is still firing
and dispatch will coalesce the
data for you in the background.
You do not have to do anything else.
And dispatch_source_get_data is the API whereby
you can get the kind of like merged result
of what happened during the time when you
were not busy handling the event handler.
So, you don't have to worry about,
you know, how do we do the coalescing.
It's very high performance so it's
OK not to handle the event.
We will do the right thing.
You do not have to feel obligated in any
ways that you need to handle an event
at a certain frequency or anything like that.
And dispatch sources are based on BSD queue,
kqueue, so that means we do offer the facility
to monitor quite of big variety of low level events.
So, let's go through some of the
sources types that we support.
You have already seen the read source.
And similarly, there is the write source.
It takes in the file descriptor to which you might
want to write and the account there is telling you,
when you call dispatch_source_get_data it will tell
you how many bytes there is available for you to write.
We also provided a vnode source.
This is probably what you would use if you want to monitor
the modifications to a directory structure or to a file.
And when you do get data on this one, it's going to
say what event actually triggered it, which means, hey,
whether the directory-- a new file was added to a directory
or was removed, you know, similar things like that.
We also provide the timer.
It doesn't take in a handle because it doesn't need to.
You just specify the interval at
which you want this source to fire.
And if you have suspended the timer or you were busy
handling the event for a long time, once you call,
getData is going to tell you the number of intervals
you missed since the last handling of the event.
And this dispatch-- other custom dispatch sources, and this
just provides application-specific custom ways to do things.
You can look up the documentation.
I would imagine most people would not need to use it.
It's just here for completeness purposes.
So, let's look at the example of where
you would set up a dispatch source timer.
You set up a timer, you give it an interval.
You want this timer to fire at that interval.
You set up the-- in this case, the
target is the main queue, so the--
when this timer fires, the event handling block
is going to get delivered on this main thread.
So, you want to suspend the timer, and in one instance
you might imagine that you are looking at a progress bar
and you are drawing the progress bar on the screen and
you don't want to update your UI every now and then
and then suddenly you have a lot of work to do.
So you want to suspend the timer, and that's fine
because in the meantime we will continue
to monitor how many seconds have passed.
So in this case, this is a timer for every second.
And then once you are ready, you resume the timer.
Well, at that point, the timer will deliver the
handler to the main thread or to the main queue here
and you would notice that we figured out that we-- there was
four seconds for which we didn't really handle this event,
so you can get that data and update your UI accordingly.
And once you have handled the event, the timer
source goes back and it's ready for fire again.
Alright, so we have suspended sources,
we have resume sources.
Now what happens, you're not interested
in monitoring the source anymore.
You're not interested in the event anymore.
So there is source cancellation.
So, canceling of source effectively means that
no further events would be delivered to you.
Now, note this asynchronous, which
means it's not preemptive in nature.
If you're already handling an event, it would
not stop that event from getting handled.
But no further events would be delivered to you.
Now cancellation handler is another block that you
could set up your sources with, and this would get fired
when the cancellation happens on the source.
This gives you a way to deallocate the resources
you might have used when creating your source.
So in the instance when we are creating read
sources, we pass in a file descriptor to do it,
but you want to know when it is OK
for me to close that file descriptor.
And because things in the dispatch world happen
asynchronously, when you call dispatch_source_cancel,
it doesn't necessarily mean it has
canceled the source immediately.
So this is a way for us to give you a notification that
it's OK to cancel your source, and that's why it is kind
of required for all the sources
that takes in filedescriptor.
And note that cancellation handler is only delivered
once, and that's the last event that gets delivered
and it gets delivered on the queue, on the target queue,
that you have set up at creation time of the source.
Now if you have suspended a source and then
you have canceled a source at a later point,
so you suspended the source, you said, "I'm too busy
handling other events," and then later down the road,
you're like, "I don't care about the source anymore."
So, we would cancel the source and no events will be
delivered but no events were delivered to you anyway
because you had the source in a suspended state.
But we would not be able to deliver the cancellation handler
until we resume the source, so make sure that you end
up resuming the source and not just cancelling it.
So let's look at an example of how we would cancel.
A very similar example of what you saw before.
We create the source, we passed in that file,
the socket here, and the main goal here is how
to handle the proper life cycle of this socket.
Well, you set up a cancel handler similar
to how you would do on an event handler,
and here in this block you see
we are just closing the socket.
And in the event handler block when
dispatch get data returns zero which means--
excuse me, this is the time when maybe the
other side of the connection has closed it.
You get an EOF and which means it's
OK for you to close the connection.
Or you might decide that this is the time
that, you know, you might want to reconnect.
So, in your cancellation handler, you would
have code to reestablish that connection,
but that's how we would cancel the source.
And as was stressed before, this is how
you set up and configure the source,
remember to resume the source to actually start monitoring.
So, target queues.
So we have mentioned this, at creation
time of sources you pass in target queues.
These are the queues where your event
handler blocks are going to get delivered.
Now, for most of you, if you're using--
you're new to dispatch, you're using dispatch APIs
for doing asynchronization, this is good enough.
When you create sources for which you want to respond,
you can do with what ever we have talked so far.
And now, we are going into Jedi training which is
you can even set the target queues of these sources.
So, not only at creation time can you
sort of-- give it passing a target queue.
While event handles are being handled,
you might dynamically say,
I don't want my event handlers to
be delivered on this queue anymore.
I want them to be delivered on other queues.
So you can do that with this API.
Well, not only can you change the target queues of sources,
you can change the target queues of queues and this is
where it-- you know, it gets a little more confusing but if
you follow along and I have some visualizations to follow
on this, you'll probably get more
of what GCD is capable of doing.
So Daniel mentioned this in passing.
He mentioned that you have global queues and in
the global queues is where the real work gets done.
So if you have the semantic model of where we
had a queue and an automatic thread came in
and that was executing those blocks on that
thread, and that's a good semantic model to have.
But your blocks finally get executed
on to the global queues.
Now when you set that target queue of a dispatch queue,
it's-- you can imagine that's effectively saying, hey,
if I have a subqueue and I set the target
queue of this subqueue, then the blocks running
on the subqueue is effectively
being run by that target queue.
Now, we never passed in a target queue
when we created our dispatched queue.
We just passed in a name and that was it.
Because we set up the target queue of this dispatch queues
that we created as the global default priority queue.
So, the target queue of the queues that you create are by
default going to get run on the default priority queue.
So, let's quickly look at a code example
and then we will move to a visualization
which will probably make it simpler to understand.
So here, you would create a queue, probably
familiar to many of you from the first session.
And this is how you would get one
of those background queues.
So, as I mentioned, when you originally create
this queue, its target queue is the default queue,
and you might want to change it to the low priority queue.
So, in this case, we get the low priority queue, and
then we set the target queue to that low priority queue.
So now, overall in our system, we have four queues --
the main queue where the main queue
is being drained by the main thread.
So, this is the queue you want to submit
works on which you want to update the UI.
And in addition, we have these three global queues, the
low priority one, the default, and the high priority,
which means the blocks running on this low
priority queue are drained by low priority threads.
The default queue is drained by default priority threads.
And the high priority queue is
drained by high priority threads.
Say we have a source A and we set the target
queue to be opt out at the main queue.
So blocks are events from these sources.
When events fire for this source, the event handling
block is going to get delivered on the main queue.
Now, you create a dispatch_queue, and by default, the target
queue of this queue becomes that of the default priority.
You create another source, in this case,
source B, and you set the target queue
of source B to that queue that you have created.
What it means is when events for this source fires,
the event handling blocks would ultimately
get run by the default priority queue.
You can change the target queue of your queue to the
low priority queue using the example that we saw before.
What this changes is now your blocks are
going to get run, the event handling blocks
at source B is going get run by low priority threads.
Now, before we change the target queue of source A, source
A and source B could fire independent of each other,
and the event handling blocks would be handled
independent of each other, one on the main thread
and one drained by the low priority threads.
If you set the target queue of source A to
this intermediate queue that you have created,
then both of these event handling
blocks get channeled through this queue.
And because of the FIFO nature of these queues, only
one event handling block is going to get executed.
So, now, from this parallel or simultaneous
ways of handling both events, now,
you have only one event handling
block that is going to get delivered.
So, target queues are quite powerful.
You can create all these hierarchies and you can
solve complicated ordering problems with them.
But don't go too crazy because there is
no way for us to do detection of loops.
And in your particular instance, you might
find, oh, this is quite simple, but try it--
I mean, believe us, we tried it, and
we've-- we couldn't do it very well.
So, it's difficult to do loop detection
in these kinds of things.
Now, when you set the target queue of a queue or when
you set the target queue of the subqueue to a queue,
you can also guarantee some kind of a
block ordering, and what do I mean by that?
Imagine you have blocks that were
getting executed on your subqueue,
and you decided to change the target
queue of this subqueue to a parent queue.
That means at that point, all the blocks within the
subqueue that were enqueued to be run kind of gets moved
as a super block containing all the subqueues which
gets run on the parent queue of the target queue.
So here, hopefully, that visualization will help.
You have a queue A, again by default, it had set the
target queue to that of the default priority queue.
You have queue B and queue C.
All the blocks are running concurrently.
Well, not that the blocks in queue B are still running
serially, but blocks of queue A, blocks from within queue B
and blocks from within queue C
could be executing at the same time.
So, you have queue B and queue C.
So, you change the target queues of
queue B and queue C to that of queue A.
What you've done with this from the simultaneous execution
of blocks in queue B and queue C, since you channeled them
to queue A, now only one block is going to
run at one time because of the FIFO nature.
Now, you might imagine why do I stack these queues,
what's the point of doing this kind
of arbitrary hierarchy and stuff?
One way to look at it is say, for instance, you are writing
a transaction system, and for which you have different types
of operation, an update, a delete, and things like that.
But obviously, these operations are
working on the same data structure.
So, you have seen previously that you
can use queues as locking mechanism.
So, you have a queue protecting that data structure.
But you also want partial ordering between
the types of operation that are coming in.
So you have a bunch of update operations,
a bunch of delete operations.
So, it is important for you to kind of order the
update operations among all the update operations
that there are, and also within the delete operations.
So, you have a queue to do the serial ordering
between the different types of operation.
You also get the flexibility to manage these operations.
So, you want to suspend all delete
operations for the time being,
and you can actually suspend the queue as we'll see later.
So, it gives you a lot of flexibility in your data
structure in the ways you want it to be accessed,
and you can use the in-build flexibles, you have
the queue into your algorithms if you want to.
So, we have talked about sources,
we have talked about queues.
And that's the main big part of GCD.
But GCD still has-- is a little bit
bigger than just these two things.
And as you will see, as I just said, you know, the queues
and sources are big part of it, but there is other stuff
in GCD, and these are all available to you.
But we are going to concentrate on the common
operations that you can do on this GCD objects.
Well, one of these is the retain and release.
You have seen that you can do dispatch_retain
and dispatch_release to do your memory management
of these objects, very similar to
what you would do on CF objects.
With dispatch calls, dispatch actually
retains the queues that you're synching on,
which means when you call dispatch_async or
you call dispatch_sync and you pass in a queue,
we retain the queue for you, so you do not have
to explicitly do memory management for those.
In other words, if there is a dispatch API that
requires you to pass a dispatch object to it,
we will do the proper memory management
for you, you do not have to know this.
Let's talk a little bit about managing
object lifetime and why is this important.
The issue here is you have a function A,
and from within the body of function A,
you call dispatch_async, and you dispatch you async a block.
When function A returns, at some point later, that
block is going to get executed asynchronously.
So, whatever variables you've captured
within the block in this--
within the function body, you have to
make sure that they have proper lifetime.
So, that is where this lifetime management comes into play
because you're dealing with this asynchronous model of piece
of code working on data that is
kind of beyond the functional scope.
So, you-- what you have to do therefore is make sure
that you retained the objects within these blocks.
So, to extend the lifetime beyond the functional scope,
you have to make sure these objects are retained so that
when at a later point when dispatch tries to
execute them, these objects are still valid.
The good news or the very good news for most of you is
most of the time you're dealing with Objective-C objects,
and the block runtime will do this automatically for
you, so you don't have to think about it too much.
But other objects, so for instance-- and we went
over this in great depth in the first session,
so if you want to take a look at it
or want to come back to the next one,
you will see how we do retaining of objects that we need to.
The idea here is that if you're passing CF objects,
blocks would not be very helpful in managing that lifetime
and you have to explicitly retain and release them.
We've kind of already seen this.
We can resuspend and resume dispatched objects.
So, dispatch sources, suspension is very clear,
it means your event handling is suspended,
event handler blocks are not going to get enqueued anymore.
For queues, suspending a queue effectively means
blocks enqueued on that queue are not going to get run.
One thing to note here again is sources
are created in a suspended state.
Now, you might be getting tired of
this same thing that I'm repeating.
One of the things that we see is people creates
sources and if they forget to resume it,
and they blame Grand Central for
not monitoring those sources.
So, just make sure that you resume the
source to actually start monitoring.
Also, when you call suspension
on a queue, it is asynchronous.
So, it is executing blocks one at a time, it's not
going to preempt the executing block from running,
it's going to finish that and then going to suspend.
But imagine you have a source, and you set the
target queue of that source to fire on a queue.
You can reliably suspend this source by calling
dispatch_suspend on that source from the event handler.
Because when the event handler is firing, that means
that is the only block that is working on the source.
Even though the event is firing and GCD is maintaining
the state and coalescing the state as the event is firing
at the background, that is the only
user block that is getting executed.
So, you can suspend the source from the block, and
this will reliable suspend the dispatched source.
So, we try to be as close to CF objects in this case.
And we also provide application context to dispatch sources.
So, we have set and get specifiers.
So, we can set a context on any of these dispatched sources.
And we also provide finalizer callbacks.
The idea is that when the dispatched source is destroyed,
you cannot reliable actually know what the state is.
So that object is already destroyed, and therefore,
you can only call a function pointer at that point.
So, that's about it.
You can get more information in the Developer Forums.
There's a good GCD guide that you can look into.
You can ask Michael.
And you can even look at the code yourself.
It's open source, so feel free to use that resource.
There is a repeat session for this
that's happening today at 2 o'clock.